---
title: Introduction
description:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Introduction

This dissertation focuses on Sinhala[^1] typography and printed letterforms in the early 19th century and the factors that influenced the development of them. The transformation of Sinhala script from letters written on a palm leaf to typographic letterforms printed on paper with metal typesetting began in the 18th century. However, traces of the current style of letterforms and typography are first seen at the beginning of the 19th century with the advent of Sinhala printing and publishing by the British missionaries. Histories of printing and linguistics of Ceylon[^2] provide an insight into the development of the Sinhala printing and language, and the influences of politics and socioeconomics. Until now, how these circumstances affected the style of typography, type making process and the letterforms has not been explored in particular depth. 

This study attempts to collate how the cultural and social transformations of early 19th century Ceylon affected the printing and publishing industry and how those changes affected typography and letterforms in the subsequent years. Additionally, this document seeks to systematically study the precise historical events and personalities that influenced the type making process and the Sinhala types of the period. While this study does not claim to be conclusive, it covers a range of organisations, personalities, incidents, and original printed material that are representative of the time and the themes discussed. 

This dissertation examines significant contributions by three principal printing and type making operations; the Dutch Press in Colombo; the Serampore Mission Press in Serampore, India; and the Wesleyan Mission Press in Colombo. The most active and influential missionary printing outfit of the time, Wesleyan Mission Press, operated between the years of 1814 to 1878. The secondary sources consulted build an understanding of the atmosphere of 19th century colonial Ceylon and the context in which the developments in typography and type making took place is based on the consultation of primary sources including correspondence, reports and personals accounts of involved parties. The imperfections of printing caused by the circumstances of the time do not warrant a conclusive analysis of the letterforms; rather this study attempt to analyse the letterforms within the context of the research findings. 

This dissertation attempts to contextualise the early transitional years of Sinhala typography and type, in relation to technology, culture and the social conditions of the time. This study only concerns a limited sample of books from the time that corresponds to historical events. An in depth analysis of wider range of material could potentially uncover further insight into the period. Understanding of the constraints and conditions that shaped the current Sinhala letterforms opens up space for further studies in the evolution of the Sinhala printed letter, and widens the possibilities for Sinhala type design.

## 1.1 Sinhala script 

Sinhala is a native script to Sri Lanka and, used for writing Sinhala one of the two national languages of Sri Lanka. rooted in Brahmic script family. Sinhala is also used to write Buddhist literature in Pali and Sanskrit languages. Sinhala has gone through three main stages of development: linear, semi-linear and circular. Starting with early horizontal and vertical lines of the Brahmi script forms on the stone inscriptions. Semilinear forms of the script are represented in Sigiriya mirror wall inscriptions written in 8th – 10th century CE. With the Buddhist palm leaf manuscript tradition, the graphical forms of the Sinhala letters became more circular. A metal or wood stylus is used for writing on palm leaf and the letterforms were monolinear. Current Sinhala letterforms are dominantly formed with round smooth strokes. In general, the letterforms are wide and dense with complex strokes occurring inside the primary form. It is an alpha syllabary with the consonants have an inherent vowel and absence of the inherent vowel is marked with Al-lakuna (commonly referred in Indic scripts as Virama ). Different vowel marks are combined to base consonant forming syllables. These marks are applied in different positions (above/below the consonant or before/after a consonant). Some combinations of consonant-vowel mark combinations form ligatures that are visually disconnected from the base characters. The composition of the language is explained in other studies

[^1]: The literature from the time refer to language and script in many     different  
[^2]: This dissertation uses ‘Ceylon’ as opposed to ‘Sri Lanka’ as the     it was
