---
title: Sinhala typography in the 18th Century
description:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Sinhala typography in the 18th Century

Sinhala movable types were first used by the Dutch Press in Colombo in 1737.[^1] The Dutch Reformed Church and the Dutch East India Company established the press with the primary focus of printing pamphlets carrying notices from the government called ‘plakkatens’ and Sinhala bible. The Press remained active until the British took over the control in 1796 and had developed a distinctive style of Sinhala letterforms and typography. The Dutch rule in Ceylon was trade oriented and peace and order was a priority. Although the Press printed bible and Christian scriptures, the missionary activities were not widely supported by the Dutch rulers. The missionaries of the Dutch Reformed Church were more successful in educating the populace than proselytization.[^2]

The type making tools and the and the Sinhala types used by the Dutch Press were made locally. Gabriel Schade who was the baas (superintendent) of the armoury took up the task of setting up a press and making the founts for Sinhala in 1825.[^3] Schade was in charge of fine metal work required in producing and maintaining the guns in the Dutch armoury. At his first attempt, he prepared the moulds for two Sinhala founts and tools required for making type. He was a skilled craftsman with an understanding of mechanics and well-versed in metalwork.[^4] Regardless of his competency in metal craft, he must have received help from Sinhala scribes and native silversmiths.[^5] These helpers must have have been from Southern and coastal areas, given that Dutch only had wide access to the coastal areas of Ceylon. The change of Governor and management delayed the work by Schade until 1734. The printing office was active in 1736 with a press sent from the Dutch Government in Java.[^6] Considering the available technology of the time, it would likely have been a low country wooden hand press.

Apart from the Sinhala types, the type foundry at Dutch Press produced types for Tamil and Malayalam.[^7] The Press primarily produced government notices known as plakkaten, religious publications and school books. Between 1736 and 1791, the Press printed a total of sixty-three books in Sinhala, Tamil, Portuguese and Dutch, excluding the plakkatens. Dutch soldiers were employed at the Press and it is likely that they had native helpers and correctors to help with the language.

## 1.1 Typography of the Dutch Press

The introduction of printing meant adapting a language to metal type composition model, and Sinhala printing led to reforms in the usage of the Sinhala language. The Sinhala typography of the Dutch Press is a hybrid of Western language and typographic standards styles and elements of the palm leaf manuscript traditions. Portuguese first introduced paper to Ceylon in the 16th century but was not in wide use. The palm leaf manuscripts were the only reference on Sinhala typesetting available for Dutch compositors.

One prominent reform of the Sinhala language, based on a typographic application, is the introduction of word boundaries to Sinhala.[^8] Classical Sinhala texts were written on palm leaf manuscript as a single sequence of characters without spaces between the words.[^9] The early plakkatens from the Press does not include word boundaries and follows the same structure as palm leaf manuscripts. In later publications the word boundaries are introduced, but there are inconsistencies in breaking words as standards for the division was not in place.

Hyphenation was introduced in the text with a relatively shorter double horizontal lines -this is an important development. Sinhala did not develop a conventional hyphenation system in the later years. The development of word-breaking might have diminished the requirement for hyphenation. The colon was also introduced to Sinhala by the Dutch Press. Two Sinhala punctuations seen in palm leaf manuscripts have been discarded in the Dutch Press work. The *kakapada* (crows foot) or double comma which is used to mark end of a phrase. And applications of *peiyala* (the use of *pe* with kundaliya on either side of a line, word or a passage) which marks the had to be repetition of a text block. Repeating verses and phrases is a characteristic of Buddhist chantings and scripture, and peiliya was a way of saving space.

The prominent use of kundaliya (෴)- a traditional Sinhala punctuation mark-as a typographic artefact is a characteristic of the Dutch press. Kundaliya is the most common punctuation mark in Sinhala palm leaf manuscripts with a range of functions in the text.[^10] A single occurrence marks the end of a phrase or a sentence, where a pause is required. Double and triple kundaliya indicates the end of sections. Three sets of double kundaliya marks the end of a chapter.[^11] Kundaliya was also used as a decorative element to fill in the margins.

Compositors at the Dutch press extensively used kundaliya, as both a punctuation marker and a decorative element in conjunction with Western typographic decorations and borders. Highly decorated multi-line initials are another notable characteristic borrowed from Latin script typography. Some initials are custom cut and full of decorative elements, while in other instances a character from larger size fount was used with multiple kundaliya to decorate around the character.

*Sinhala Ilakkam*, the numerations system commonly seen in Sinhala Astrological tables was used by the Dutch throughout the publications for page numbers, chapters numbers and the date of publication.[^12] Although there are no major multilingual publications from the press, title pages of the books contain a Dutch title page followed by a Sinhala title page. Even with the limited founts for both Sinhala and Latin scripts, compositors have attempted to set two title pages in an identical layout.

Christian scriptures and Buddhist and Sinhala classical texts are fundamentally different in organisation, hierarchy and function. Sinhala punctuation and the shapes of the letters were heavily influenced by the format of the Buddhist texts and the process of writing on the palm leaf. Introduction of new punctuations, omitting of selected Sinhala punctuations and retaining the kundaliya portrays the Dutch Press’s approach to adapting Sinhala for new kind of text content and the composing with movable type.

## 2.2 Style, composition and influences

Schade cut only two founts in 1729, and the smaller fount would have been a later addition. The Sinhala type produced in 1729 were damaged by the late 1830s. Another Dutch soldier was trained and continued the typecasting work after the demise of Schade in 1837. The foundry at the Press produced three Sinhala founts in 12, 18 and 36 pica sizes. \[image: GS01-03 comparison\] The style and proportions of the three founts are identical except for differences caused by the punchcutting, and the 18 pica design is analysed here. The monolinear nature, longer exit strokes and the overall shapes these founts are evidence of the influence of letterforms of palm leaf manuscripts.[^13] The Sinhala palm leaf manuscripts had a long running tradition with many different styles of writing. \[image: palm leaf work vs. GS01 \]

Two founts that Schade produced in 1729 had fourteen sorts each, according to historian Juranesses. This fount uses a compound sorts system to form consonant ligatures. The character set is small since the vowel symbols (pili), are separate sorts with a modular approach to the composition of ligatures[^14]. The consonant ligatures are formed by combining base consonant sorts with smaller pili (matra) sorts. For some consonant ligatures such as ක්‍රී(krii) , ක්‍රෝ (kroo) two to four separate sorts are used.

Dutch Sinhala founts contain a range of idiosyncrasies in design and unique ligature characters. The straight vertical endstroke of letter ද (da) is unique to this fount. The ‘Aa’ ා matra ligatures which are only available for base consonants ක(ka), න(na), ත(ta), ණ(nna), ග(ga), හ(ha) which of the exit stroke terminate in the baseline region. The ඇ (Ae) is a single character in a linguistic context, but in visual composition it is a combination of the vowel අ (a) and mark ැ. In the Dutch Press type there is a dedicated ligature for ඇ (ae). and it is likely that Schade based his designs on a Sinhala manuscript with fast written letters where these ligatures are common.[^15]

Christian scriptures and Buddhist and Sinhala classical texts are fundamentally different in organisation, hierarchy and the function of the text. Sinhala punctuation and the shapes of the letters were heavily influenced by the format of the Buddhist texts and the process of writing on the palm leaf. Introduction of new punctuation, omitting of selected Sinhala punctuation and retaining the kundaliya portrays the Dutch Press’s approach to adapting Sinhala for a new kind of text content and composing with movable type.

The Dutch Press was a government operation and the Dutch missionaries were not involved in the type-making or the printing process. The heavy influence of the palm leaf manuscript style in the early 18th century Sinhala types and typography completely diminished in the 19th century when the British colonisation and missionary proselytization efforts were much more aggressive than the Dutch colonisation.

[^1]:  The first recorded printing in Sinhala script is the Joannes     Ruell’s ‘Gram
[^2]: J. Corea, ‘One Hundred Years of Education in Ceylon*’*, *Modern     Asian Studies*, vol
[^3]: This dissertation uses the word ‘fount’ to indicate metal type.
[^4]: M.W. Jurriaanse, ‘Gabriel Schade and his invention of the     Sinhalese type’,* *
[^5]: T. Kularatne, ‘The Wesleyan Methodist Mission in the Printing and     Publishing
[^6]: Memoir Left by Jacob Christiaan Pielat to His Successor, Diederik     Van Dom
[^7]: Kularatne, *History of Printing, *p. 21  
[^8]:  The consonants and vowels indicate a start of a word in     Classical Sinhala writ  
[^9]:  J. Dissanayaka, *Encyclopaedia of Sinhala language and culture*,     (2012) p. 524  
[^10]:  Ibid. p. 659, 660, 666.  
[^11]:  Kularatne, *History of Printing,* p. 5  
[^12]:  H. Wijayawardhana, *Numerations in the Sinhala Language.     (*2009)  
[^13]:  Kularatne notes that Rull’s books would have been a basis to     the Schade’s Sinha  
[^14]:  A *sort* is a piece of metal type.  
[^15]:  See W. A. De Silva, *Catalogue of palm leaf manuscripts in the     Library of the *
