---
title: 
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# A background of 19th century Ceylon

During the 19th century, the political change from monarchy to that of the colonial rule established by the British drastically impacted the social, economic and cultural atmosphere of Ceylon. For about two centuries before the advent of British rule, the coastal areas of Ceylon were under the rule of the Portuguese and, subsequently, the Dutch, with the central parts being ruled by native monarchs. In 1795, the East India Company (EIC) took control of the majority Dutch-occupied regions, and governed them from the Madras Presidency; its base was in southern India. In 1798, a Crown and EIC government was instated in order to accommodate the interests of both the British Government and EIC.[^1] The Kandyan Convention, 1815 abolished monarchy and the entire island became a British Colony.[^2] In spite of the abolition, the central parts of the country were not widely accessible to the British until the 1850’s, largely due to a mutiny led by Kandyan aristocrats, who opposed the British rule.[^3] The British government became stable by the mid-1800s and by the late-1860s, the central, northern and southern parts of the country were connected with developments in railway and road infrastructure. The success in coffee, tea and cinnamon plantations fuelled the economy and development of other industries.[^4]

## Missionary education and printing

The establishment of the colonial rule paved the way for missionary activities in Ceylon. During the 19th century, the evangelical movement had gained significant momentum in England, and it started looking towards spreading Christianity in its colonies. English, European and American missions, such as The Colombo Auxiler in 1812, the Wesleyan Missionary Society in 1814, the Church Missionary Society in 1818 and American Mission in Jaffna in 1816 established base in Ceylon. The government declared a religious neutrality in the colonies and at the Kandyan Convention British agreed to to safeguard Buddhism and protect its position. However, until the 1890s, the Colonial Government actively endorsed and supported the missionary activities in the island which led to mutinies in 1848.[^5] The missionary activities revolved around three main goals in the process of converting Buddhists; providing the Christian scriptures in Sinhala dominance in the education system and supressing local ideologies.

The traditional education system in Ceylon was organised around Buddhist temples and *Piriven* or monasteries for the Buddhist monks. Buddhist temples were the closest to an organised school system for the public. The* Piriven* and the Buddhist temples were dependent on the patronage from the monarchy and the continuous political turmoil in the Kandyan Kingdom caused a decline in Buddhist activity by the mid 19th century. The Dutch Reformed Church had a set up a network of schools in the southern and western coastal areas and the British colonial government reopened these schools. However, throughout the 19th century the state run schools suffered from irregular funding and improper administration.[^6] The educational needs of the colony were neglected in the first half of the 19th century as the Government prioritized reinforcing Ceylon as a strategic colonial outpost[^7]. The missionary schools, mostly in the city areas, were nevertheless stable, consistent and well-supervised. The government did not possess the resources to improve or maintain the education system and introduced a partial funding system for privately-run schools in 1850s. Missionaries were able to further expand their school system into rural areas with this support.[^8] From 1812 to 1832 the missionary societies opened two hundreand thirty five schools, which taught approximately 1o,ooo pupils.[^9] The missionary school system opened the opportunity for an educated native population. However, this number does not apply to converts from Buddhism to Christianity, as a culture of nominal christians were in place. Government schooling was generally the easiest way to secure a job in government and the missionaries’ perceived successes in converting the native population were largely superficial .[^10]

## The rise of the print document production

The Buddhist practice of preaching had created a strong oral tradition on the island. During a bana (the Buddhist practice of preaching), monks orated relevant passages and followers would sit around in a circle and listen.[^11] Reading and writing was taught at temples, but was practiced only by Buddhist monks and other educated laymen.[^12] The palm (ola) leaf manuscripts contained the most of the traditional knowledge in Buddhist literature and prose, astrology and Sinhala medicine, spells and chantings relating to traditional Sinhala rituals.[^13] Tenant writes that the Sinhalese people considered reading to be a ‘operation of magic’ and the educated who comfortably read Ola leaf manuscripts were ‘embarrassed ’ by the same letters printed on paper.[^14] Respect for the content of the manuscripts and reverence towards the educated classes by the labouring population could greatly explain why reading and writing were regarded as sacred activities.[^15]

In the first half of the 19th century, Wesleyan Mission Press was the largest printing operation in Ceylon.[^16] They produced a large body of literary work, grammar books, reading books for schools and dictionaries in Sinhala during the 19th century, which contributed towards making reading a widespread activity.[^17] In 1820 Benjamin Clough writes about plans for a reading book for schools. He realised the youth attending the schools were excited to be acquainted with ‘the art of reading’. There was lack of reading material in ‘common routine of practices, history and science’ in Sinhala, even as ola leaf manuscripts. The classical Sinhala language was too ‘high’ in which the Sinhala New Testament and Sinhala classical literature was written. Missionaries did not allow any classical Sinhala works with religious significance in the schools.[^18] Even though the children of natives attended the Christian schools, in many instances, Buddhist monks were invited, regularly to teach children ‘higher degree of Singhalese reading’ at home.[^19] The common reading books and periodicals published by the Wesleyans in later years are attempts to counter this situation.

Missionaries adopted Spoken Sinhala for their work and seem to have to avoided Classical Sinhala. Either because the style of Classical Sinhala was too difficult to comprehend or because it was synonymous with Buddhist literature. William Tolfrey, with help from a few natives, translated an updated version of the bible from 1816-1817. His translations were based on the Sanskrit and Malay translations from the Serampore press. The first versions of this bible had a twenty-two page glossary of the new words he introduced. It is likely that the Serampore translation style and approach influenced his work. After the sudden death of Tolfrey, Wesleyan Missionary Benjamin Clough and Church Missionary Societies Carter continued the translation with support from natives. Benjamin Clough is one of the most prominent missionaries of his time, as his work in Sinhala studies and writing shaped many of the standards in the later years. He was often consulted in translations involving Sinhala.

This simpler and approachable variant of Sinhala became mainstream towards 20th century and was another reason for rise of public literacy. Although there was a growing interest in reading, by the mid 19th century the country had no commercial publishers nor was there a significant demand for purchasable literature.[^20] Clough notes that was ‘no private speculation in printing’ in early decades of the 19th century. However, in 1860s saw the advent of commercial printing. The pocket size dictionaries and smaller versions of the Bibles printed by Wesleyans in this decade signifies the demand for cheaper books.[^21] The Missionary activities contributed towards popularising reading and set standards for printing in Sinhala. In Despite these accomplishments, their campaign did not succeed in increasing the appeal of conversion to the populace. In fact,their intrusive activities did more to fuel Buddhist resistance, leading them ‘to retaliate and meet the missionaries on their own grounds.’ [^22]

## Attacks on Buddhism and the Buddhist revival

The Buddhist revival movement in Ceylon originated in 1850s and was the climax of cultural and social transformation in the 19th century. There are differing interpretations of the Buddhist revival movement’s origins.[^23] However, the activities of the revival movement were undoubtedly in response to evangelical activities and the intensive campaigns to attack Buddhism by the missionaries. The Buddhists first started openly opposing missionary activities in 1848 in protest of Wesleyan missionary Daniel John Gogerly’s book *Kristiyani Prajnapati*. Gogerly, a prominent figure among contemporaries, arrived in Ceylon in 1818 as head printer for the Wesleyan Mission Press. He was a layman and soon he developed an interest in missionary activities and joined the mission. He was the superintendent of the Matara district and became well-versed in the Pali language and Buddhist literature with help from Buddhist monks in Southern Ceylon. Gogerly published work in both Sinhala and English and pioneered the study of the Pali language and Buddhist literature in the western world. But his work has been scrutinised as being influenced by the colonial mindset and biased to the missionary agenda.[^24] In 1831 he insisted on using the press primarily to attack ‘this ‘wretched system’ (Buddhist beliefs) and directing all efforts to ‘pull down this veil of Satan’.[^25] This mindset was not an accident. The missionary writing of the time was clouded with the imperialist paradigm and the idea of being a greater authority of civilization.[^26] From 1849-1861, the Wesleyan Mission Press printed and distributed more than 1 500 000 pamphlets.[^27] The majority of these pamphlets targeted buddhist beliefs and traditional ritualistic practices of Sinhalese and Gogerly’s ‘controversial style’ of writing provoked the educated Buddhist communities.[^28]

The revival movement succeeded by capitalising on insecurities among the Sinhala Buddhists caused by the missionary campaigns. The Buddhist leaders realised the importance of printing to counter the missionaries. The establishment of the first Buddhist presses, Lankoparakara Press(1862) in Galle and Sasanabhiwarddhidakaka Samagama (circa 1860) is recognised as the starting point of first phase of the ‘recovery of Buddhist confidence’, as the Buddhists were able to reply to the attacks from missionaries. The revival movement followed the same strategies as missionaries and distributed pamphlets, newspapers, periodicals in defense of Buddhism. Durlabdi Vinodini by Mohottiwatte Gunannda[^29] Thera, a prominent leader, was an answer to Gogerly’s *Kristiyani Prajnapati*. Revival movement gained momentum with establishment of a network of Buddhist schools in the 1870s onwards. Missionaries were aware of the fact that revival movement was jeopardizing their missionary efforts.[^30] the missionary activities continued to improve the standard of education and printing was responsible for increasing literacy in Ceylon. communicating their message to the natives and the Buddhist Revival movement benefited from the work of missionaries.


[^1]:  The Crown declared its interest in Ceylon in the negotiations at     in Lille,  
[^2]:  Kandyan Convention is an agreement signed between the Kandyan     Chiefs and  
[^3]: The unrest is credited to the unrest and dissatisfaction among     the people  
[^4]: Citation needed.  
[^5]: See K.M. De Silva, Social policy and missionary organizations in     Ceylon,  
[^6]: At first government paid an allowance to Wesleyan missionaries     for teaching  
[^7]: Corea, ‘One Hundred Years’ p.151.  
[^8]: See S. Jayaweera, ‘Religious Organizations and the State in     Ceylonese Educa  
[^9]: G. Mendis, Ceylon under the British (1948) p. 42  
[^10]: K. Malalgoda, Buddhism in Sinhalese society, 1750-1900. (1976)     p. 32  
[^11]: In the Foreword by T. W. Rhys Davids in M.L. Shedlock, A     Collection of Eastern  
[^12]: Kapuwa (demon doctor), Wedarala(a doctor practicing traditional     Sinha  
[^13]:  Worshipping of regional gods and demons are not originally     Buddhist  
[^14]: J. Tennent, Christianity in Ceylon.(1850) p. 45  
[^15]: Even today, in regular circumstances books are treated with an     added respect  
[^16]: Other missionary printing operations were considerably small and  
[^17]: R. S. Hardy *Ceylon and its Methodism*, p. 80. cited in R. S.     Hardy, Jubilee memori  
[^18]: C. Godakumbura, *Sinhalese literature*, (1955) p. 346  
[^19]: ibid.  
[^20]:  Clogh  
[^21]:  Citation , pocket Citation commercial printing  
[^22]:  Malalgoda, *Buddhism in Sinhalese*, p. 205  
[^23]:  See D. Swearer, Lay Buddhism and the Buddhist Revival in     Ceylon. Journal of  
[^24]: See Elizabeth J. Harris, ‘Manipulating Meaning: Daniel Gogerly’s     Nineteenth  
[^25]:  Quoted in M. Y. Gooneratne English Literature in Ceylon,     1815-1878, (1968) p.  
[^26]:  See Elizabeth J. Harris, Theravāda Buddhism and the British     encounter  
[^27]:  J. Murdoch, and J. Nicholson,* Classified catalogue of printed     tracts and books in *  
[^28]: Ibid. p. 9  
[^29]:  Ironically Gunanada Thera received early education from a     Christian school.  
[^30]:  Jayaweera, ‘*Religious Organizations*’, p. 164 