---
title:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Serampore Mission Press types

The first Sinhala fount produced by the type foundry at the Serampore Mission Press laid the path to a new style of Sinhala letterforms that matured through the century. In the 19th century, the Serampore Mission Press was the leading missionary printing and publishing outpost in the region, providing Bibles and publications in more than 40 languages.[^1] The Serampore Missionary Society and the press, under supervision of William Carey, Joshua Marshman and William Ward undertook translating of the bible into oriental languages, making new types and printing.[^2]  ^^The type foundry at Serampore produced and sold founts for many languages, including Chinese and Indian scripts. A group of native punchcutters were employed at the type foundry; Panchanan Karmakar followed by his pupil and son-in-law Manohar Karmakar were principal punchcutters. Manohar took over from his father-in-law in 1803 and cut type for at least 15 languages. Serampore press engaged with reputed calligraphers and scribes of each language to provide models for punchcutters, which in some instances were based on handwriting samples.[^3] By 1812 the foundry was cutting types for many scripts in mainland India. Although Serampore Mission did not undertake any Sinhala translation work, a Sinhala fount was in production.

## 4.1 First Sinhala fount

Arrangements for printing of Christian scriptures in Sinhala at the Serampore Mission Press were already in place before the establishment of British missionary societies in Ceylon. Printing of Sinhala scriptures was one of the first undertakings by the Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society, established in February, 1811.[^4] Rev T J Twisleton, the first Chaplain and Superintendent of Schools in Colombo, was engaged with the society in this matter. Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society agreed to bear the cost of printing 5,000 copies of the New Testament in Sinhala at Sermapore. The earlier Sinhala translation by the Dutch Press were to be used for this edition. An incomplete translation of the Old Testament preserved at the Dutch church in Colombo was to be revised and completed by Rev. Griffening, a Dutch minister born in Colombo. [^5]

Twilstone sent copies of the Sinaha scriptures printed by the Dutch press, with a specimen of letters for an improved type to Serampore.[^6] The particulars of this specimen are not recorded, but it is likely that a Sinhala scribe employed in government work produced the sample specimen for Twisleton. The first Sinhala fount was in the works by August of 1811 at Serampore Mission press.[^7] Manohar Karamakar who was at the helm of punchcutting department at the Serampore type foundry at this time was probably in charge of cutting the Sinhala fount. In 1812 Gregory de Silva[^8], an experienced printer s employed by the Dutch Government Press in Ceylon and another Sinhala corrector was sent to Serampore to aid William Ward in printing of Sinhala New Testament.[^9]

In August, 1812 the Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society was established by with highest ranking officers of the Ceylon Government in the committee. The primary objective of the society was to provide bible or fragments of its texts in local languages at low costs. The earlier arrangements by Twisleton were revised as the new committee decided that the old translation by the Dutch was faulty and not to an adequate standard. The order was reduced to two thousand copies from the old translation, to address the immediate demand for Bibles.[^10] For the time-being, a new translation was already in production by William Tolfrey, a civil servant in the British Civil Service in Ceylon.

The high quality paper bought for the Sinhala New Testament was destroyed in the fire of 1812.[^11] On 31st December 1812 the Sinhala New Testament was put to press.[^12] Due to the urgent circumstances, it was printed, bound and sent to Ceylon in batches and it lacked a comprehensive title page.[^13] The first batch of two thousand copies of St. Matthew and St. Mark arrived in Colombo in November 1813 and rest of the New Testament arrived in January 1814. This publication is omitted from the Serampore Mission Press reports from the subsequent years, probably because it was not a translation from the mission.

This edition had many shortcomings and did not align with the requirements of the missionaries in Colombo. Despite the Sinhala compositors involvement, the edition had faults and was expensive. This edition was 1183 pages in octavo size, too large and bulky for easier distribution and use.[^14] The committee decided that the revised translation should be printed in Colombo, minimising the cost. In response to the request from Colombo, the secretary of the Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society purchased a the larger Sinhala fount(SP01) from Serampore Press and sent it to Colombo. ‘Punches, matrices and 12 mounds of type’ for Sinhala arrived in Colombo on 15 March 1813.

4.2 The smaller fount

By May 1815 the Colombo Bible Society press was in operation and the gospels of Matthew and Mark were printed using the type from Serampore. Usability and appropriateness of the type for the printing of bible were in question. In 1814 William Ward of the Serampore Mission Press suggested a smaller Sinhala fount, suitable for printing in octavo. However, neither the Colombo Society and the Calcutta Bible Society had the necessary funds for the type at this time. The Committee of Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society (CABS) realised the advantages of a smaller Sinhala fount and by June 1816 patterns for a smaller Sinhala fount were in development.[^15] In 1816, the British and Foreign Bible Society agreed to bear the cost of the new Sinhala fount to be produced at Serampore. On 15th of July 1816, the Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society sent an order for a Sinhala fount in a smaller size. ‘Patterns’ for the type were enclosed with the order.[^16]

The ‘patterns’ sent to Serampore consisted of letters written by Don Abraham, a native Christian, and Petrus Panditta Sekara, a converted Buddhist monk.[^17] These two men were among the most educated and best-informed natives according to Clough. Petrus was particularly reputable native at this time. Petrus Panditta Sekara was a Nayaka Thera (a leader) in the Southern Buddhist priesthood in the name of Shree Dharma Panditha Tera before his baptism in the Christmas eve of 1814 in Colombo. He was well-versed in Pali, Buddhism and Sinhala sciences and his conversion was a major advantage for missionaries. Both men preached in Sinhala and were involved in the translation projects and printing of Sinhala scriptures. They participated in the translation headed by William Tolfrey. After the demise of Tolfrey, Don Abraham was appointed the Assistant to Rev. Carter of the Church Mission and Petrus was appointed as an assistant to Clough in the continuous process to translate the bible.[^18]

In the early 1800s, The Serampore Mission Press was planning to reduce type sizes of all non-Latin founts while maintaining the clarity and readability. ‘Largeness of the oriental types’ caused higher printing costs, limiting the number of copies and Sinhala was one of the most expensive to print.[^19] The plan was finally executed by John Lawson, who joined the Serampore press in 1812.[^20] Lawson was a skilled punchcutter and not only he reduced the type sizes, but improved the quality of the designs as well. He worked with native punchcutters of Serampore, who completed the founts he started.[^21] Given Lawson’s role in cutting smaller types, it is likely that he was involved in cutting the second Sinhala fount. Ward, who previously supervised Sinhala printing, would also likely have contributed.

## 4.3 Style, composition and influences

The two Serampore Sinhala founts are a milestone in Sinhala typography and type making for few reasons. It is the first instance in which Sinhala letters has a stroke modulation. The Wesleyan Mission Press continued to using the Serampore types while continuously revising and adding to them and they used the Serampore types as a base for own founts. The large Sinhala fount from Serampore Press (SP01) was used in the* Cinghalese Translation of the New Testament* (1813). Regardless of the presence of the two compositors from the Ceylon Government Press, the composition and the typography completely deviate from the early Sinhala Dutch Typography. Kundaliya is not used in this edition, but Sinhala numerals; as used as in the Dutch press. It is likely that the general structure and the typographic style of the Serampore Press’s Indian languages Bible continued to influence their other publications in Indic scripts. Considering the fast nature of the job, printing is of a high quality. This is the first instance in which parentheses is seen used in Sinhala bible text.

The typeface moves aways from the round stroke structure of the Dutch Press types. The top stroke behaviour of the characters such as ම(ma), ඔ(o), ව(va) turns inside to the main body making the characters compact. This exit stroke is true for the all characters and as a result the letterforms are contained in appearance. The stroke structure of the letterforms such as න(na), න(ta), ක(ka), ද(da) is evidence of the influence of written forms and the of the notable characteristics is the introduction of the circular ‘eye’ with a counter. 

The letterforms has been condensed vertically, specially in ටි group consonant ligatures such as ඛි(khi), බි(bi), මි(mi), ධි(dhi), වි(vi), to accommodate the characters into the type height.

Composition of both the SP01 and SP02 are similar. Both founts employ the same ‘compound sorts system’ to form consonant ligatures as in the Dutch Press types. The inconsistent nature of the symbols (pili), which in some instances offset from the base consonants is evidence to that the letterforms are not adapted to the composition method. The differing distances between the base consonants and the vowel symbols (pili) and inconsistent horizontal placement breaks the visual integrity of the typeface.

Both the large (SP01) and the smaller (SP02) founts were based on the samples sent from Ceylon. It is likely that the stroke modulation was present in the written samples, and the Serampore punch cutters reproduced the modulation from them. The Portuguese introduced paper to Ceylon in the 16th century and by the 19th century, pens and paper were in use in the government service. The samples sent to Serampore were for writing. If the samples were produced by the missionaries using their available stationary, it is likely that a pointed nib pen was the accompanying writing implement.

While the individual letterforms of the SP01 and SP02 are closer to written forms and more fluid in construction, the composition and combinations of consonant ligatures lack the same qualities. In the process of adapting the letterforms from the written samples into punches, it is likely that Serampore punchcutters used the composition model of the Dutch Press types. However the Serampore Sinhala types introduced a new model of letterforms based on the forms of Sinhala letters written on paper, as opposed to the Dutch Press types based on the palm-leaf forms.


[^1]: S. Khan, *William Cary and the Serampore Books*  
[^2]:  M. Khan, *William Carey and the Serampore books (1800-1834)*,     (1961) p. 229  
[^3]:  Ibid.  
[^4]: W. Harvard, *A narrative of the establishment and progress of the     missions to Ceylon *  
[^5]: Extracts from the First Report of Culcutta Bible Society (1812)     in the appendix of  
[^6]: Ibid.  
[^7]: *1st Memoir of the Serampore translations for 1808*.  
[^8]: . The name is mentioned as Gregoriua Zoyza in Hardy,* Jubilee* p.     28  
[^9]:   
[^10]: Extracts from the Second Report of Culcutta Bible Society (20     Feb 1813) in  
[^11]: The press recovered from the damage of the fire within a few     months.  
[^12]: Memoirs of Serampore  
[^13]: Kularatne, *History of Printing,* p. 63,64  
[^14]:  Ibid.  
[^15]:  In the appendix of Thirteenth Report of the BFBS. (1817).* The     Ninth Report of the *  
[^16]:  Extracts from the Fourth report of CABS. (1816) in the *The     Fourteenth Report *  
[^17]: The full name of Don Abraham is presented in different records.  
[^18]:  Extracts from the Quarterly Letters & etc 1826  
[^19]:  1811, A third Memoir of the Translation carrying at the     Serampore in a letter  
[^20]:  Timothy Whelan, *Baptist Autographs in the John Rylands     University Library of *  
[^21]:  F. Ross, *The printed Bengali character and its     evolution*.(1999) p. 51 