---
title:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Establishment of the Wesleyan Mission Press

The most influential contributions to the development of Sinhala typography, type and printing in the 19th century were undoubtedly made by the Wesleyan Missionaries. Their work in the translation of scriptures, type making and printing resemble work by the Serampore Mission in Bengal.[^1] They were the largest printing and publishing outfit in 19th century Ceylon, producing a body of work that contributed to the standardisation of the Sinhala language and grammar, in spite of being heavily influenced by the missionary agenda.[^2]

A group of six missionaries from Wesleyan Missionary Society in London, led by Dr Alexander Coke left Britain in 1813 for Ceylon. After a six month journey, they arrived in Ceylon through Bombay. In July 1814, The Wesleyan Missionary Society was formed as two circuits based on the linguistic division and nature of distinct cultures. The ‘Southern Singahalese District’ consisted of Colombo and the southern coastal areas, where the majority natives speak the Sinhala language.[^3] The* ‘Northern Tamil District’ consisted of northern and eastern coastal areas where the majority of the population spoke Tamil.[^4] The districts had separate administration and accounts, and the printing enterprise in Colombo was managed by the Southern District.

Unlike the other contemporary missionary societies in Ceylon, Wesleyan missionaries were prepared to start the printing operation immediately. Two missionaries in the party, William Martin Harvard and Thomas Squance, were both acquainted with the craft of printing. Harvard realised the opportunity to set up a printing press in Ceylon and with Coke, he sourced provisions for a printing press. A collection of books from Coke’s personal library was selected for the mission’s library to aid in the Missions translations activities. Although the plans for a printing press was not conceived initially, with Harvard’s efforts missionaries were equipped to start printing by the time they left Britain.

Harvard arrived in Ceylon with the printing press and equipment in 1814.[^5] He was appointed the superintendent of the Mission in Colombo and the Press. With support from the Andrew Amour, a British priest in Colombo, the Wesleyan Mission started its activities in a house on the main street of Pettah. Harvard immediately set up the printing press and started printing a spelling book for Sunday school and a Hymn book. Wesleyan Press produced superior quality work to any of the previous printing work executed in the country, and the press started receiving requests for printing from other institutions. The 3rd Report of Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society (CABS) was printed at the Wesleyan Mission Press, regardless of having a printing operation at the CABS. The success of this report led to a strong collaboration between the two missionary societies in printing and publishing.

## Scope of printing and publishing

Printing was the primary tool for missionaries in proselytising Christianity and the Wesleyans saw the printing press as their biggest asset.[^6] Printing Christian scriptures and religious texts contributed directly to the goal of spreading the word of God, and other publications such as grammar books, dictionaries and general literature had an indirect impact by providing necessary knowledge for missionaries. By 1862, the press had printed around 1.5 million separate publications in Sinhala, English, Tamil, Portuguese and Burmese.[^7] In 1878 alone missionaries printed 138 publications. Their body of work covers a wide range including, Bibles and portions of scriptures, biblical and theological texts, educational publications such as grammar books and dictionaries, general literature and periodicals, tracts and pamphlets and ephemera such as notices, invitations and advertisements.[^8]Apart from own publications, the Wesleyan Press frequently printed orders from other Christian organisations. CABS was the principal sponsor of printing Bibles and Wesleyan’s reputation for the quality secured them orders from Church Missionary Society, the Christian Vernacular Education Society, The Bible Society, The Ceylon Religious Tract Society, Friend in Need Society, Christian Literature Society and other Christian organisations and private individuals.[^9]

Being able to speak and understand Sinhala, was essential for missionaries in Ceylon.[^10] In the 1820s Weslyans started publishing resources for learning Sinhala, and in the process produced some of the most significant publications on the Sinhala language and culture to be published in the 19th century. Between 1815 to 1868 they published twenty-nine educational publications covering spelling, grammar, history, oriental literature and arithmetic.[^11] The Clough’s Dictionaries are the greatest achievement in the early years of press. Benjamin Clough compiled it, and it was printed in two editions; English-Sinhalese edition with twenty-five thousand words in 1821, and Sinhalese-English edition with 40 000 words in 1830.[^12]

The Mission also published periodical called* Lanka Nidhana* (Treasure of Ceylon) in Sinhala which consisted articles on ‘subjects related to the island’.[^13] Wesleyans printed and distributed a staggering amount of ephemera portraying the illusive nature of Buddhism and ‘devil worshipping’. A notice and handbills challenging ‘demon-priests’ to demonstrate their abilities was distributed in ‘all directions’ and displayed all public places.[^14] These ephemera could be the single most distributed work by the Wesleyan Mission Press. The wide variety of publications that Wesleyans produced required expertise in complex Sinhala typography and by the 1860s Wesleyan Press compositors were producing high quality Sinhala -English multilingual typography.

## Administration and management

Despite the quality of printing and typographic execution, the press was not profitable and not well-administered until the 1870s. While there was interest among the missionaries to be involved in printing and publishing work, throughout the first four decades, there was no single person in charge of the administration of the press. Even the missionaries who were in charge of supervising the printing had to divide time between the press and regular missionary activities. In 1818, Harvard requested the Wesleyan Missionary Society in London to send a dedicated layman to supervise and administrate the press.[^15] In response to Harvard’s request the London Society sent Daniel Gogerly in 1818. Although Gorgerly managed to improve the efficiency of the press, and quality of the work, he was not in charge of the finances and administration. In 1819 Harvard left Ceylon finishing his tenure and missionaries in Colombo William Buckerly Fox, Benjamin Clough and John Callaway managed the affairs of the press. All three missionaries had great interest in literature and printing the enterprise, but none of them were in charge of book-keeping. An incident where the press used all the paper in the warehouse without realising ultimately delaying the production, proves the problems of management. Financial difficulties caused by loss of sponsors and the lack management caused missionaries to consider closing the press in 1823. However, between 1823 to 1827 the press was still functioning in small scale. In 1828 Clough took over the administration of the press and managed to make it profitable, donating some of the profit back to the Society.[^16]

Making profit was not a primary goal of the Wesleyan printing enterprise and they were in the forefront in providing material for ‘moderate prices’.[^17] From the beginning, most publications were either sponsored or pre-sold. Even by the late 19th-century majority of the work of the press came from other Christian organisations. The school books from the mission were distributed free of charge among the students, as only a handful could afford to purchase.[^18] Retail sales of books was not present until the 1860s. Singhalese Religious Tract Society opened a book depot in Colombo and made a considerable profit in 1863-64 selling Sinhala, Tamil and English tracts.[^19] Despite the difficulties in the early 1820s, the missionaries were determined to keep the press running, as it was an essential to their activities.

## Printing conditions

Initially, the quality of the Wesleyan printing work was higher due to two factors; equipment and material were all new and, Harvard, who was in charge of the press was a trained printer with experience in the organisation of a printing press and understanding of western typography.[^20] Before joining the mission, Harvard, born in 1790 in London, worked in printing and type making at Fry and Co. in London. The operations of the press became a priority because of Harvard’s dual roles as the in charge of the Colombo Mission and the Superintendent of the Printing Press. During his short tenure in Ceylon from 1814 to 1819, Harvard developed the Wesleyan Mission Press into a fully fledged printing operation.

In its beginnings, the Press had only essential equipment and supplies brought from London. Among the material were a ‘complete printing press, a box of printing ink, four boxes of printing types, packing-cases of printing paper’.[^21] Harvard understood the requirements for an efficient operation and acquired necessary tools and equipment, trained the staff and established partnerships with other organisations. CABS Press was not efficient due to lack of skilled staff and outsourced most of their work to Wesleyans. Harvard made an agreement with CABS to provide printing services for discounted prices and on 2nd May 1816, CABS closed down their press, and two printing machines were relocated to Wesleyan Mission Press. In 1820 with the addition of a ‘new press with ironwork’ Wesleyan had four printing presses in operation.[^22] Three of them were probably wooden presses and the iron press was a Stanhope press built in 1800’s. The printing ink was produced in-house following the instructions from Serampore Mission Press.[^23] In the later years, ink was imported in from England. The paper was imported from England and, in some instances from India.[^24] But constant interruptions of paper supply caused delays in production.[^25] The attempts to produce paper locally with support from the government failed due to lack of knowledge of the craft.[^26]

In 1816, Press moved to the first dedicated space in the Dam Street, Pettah. It was part of the Wesleyan Mission House, a compact complex specifically built to house all the activities of the mission. It had dedicated space for printing and book-binding offices, a type foundry and a warehouse.[^27] Operations remained in this premises until relocation to a newly constructed building in Colpetty,in 1879. By the 1870’s the scope of the printing was expanding and missionaries felt the need for a more spacious and organised space for the press and the publishing department. James Nicholson, a missionary whose contributions are discussed in chapter 6, undertook the moving the press to the new establishment.

Wesleyans faced the challenge of finding skilled and trained labour for the printing press throughout the early 19th century. The craft of printing and operating complex machinery was new to the natives. Acquiring workmanship and skills required for printing took a considerable time and commitment. In many instances, the missionaries recruited ‘intelligent boys*’* from ‘respectable families’ who attended their schools to work in the press. The quality of execution suffered as it was very difficult to get the ‘men to pay proper attention’.[^28] Harvard had to supervise the work carefully, and ‘teach, scold or praise, as circumstances’.[^29] Harvard hired Emanuel Jantz, an experienced printer to who worked at the Government Press to manage the press. Jantz proved to be an excellent printer and later became the Head Printer.[^30] By the year 1817, the Wesleyan Press had a staff of thirty-one under Harvard’s supervision. A clerk to manage the book room, a Tamil translator, a Sinhala translator, eight press operators, three English compositors, two Tamil compositors, four Sinhala compositors, five book-binders, four folding boys and two letter founders.[^31] For work in the type foundry, it is likely that silversmiths were hired as punchcutters. Silverwork was a thriving craft in Ceylon by the 19th century, and there were skilful silversmiths.[^32] In few occassions, due to administration issues press faced financial few occasions and, many skilled workers left for jobs in other printing presses.


[^1]:  R. S. Hardy *Ceylon and its Methodism*, p. 80. Cited in* Jubilee (1964) 
[^2]:  Kularatne, *History of Printing,* p. 69  
[^3]:  Harvard, *A Narrative*, p. 345  
[^4]:  The Tamil district had its own printing press in Batticaloa.  
[^5]:  Harvard and his wife stayed back in Bombay due to the health conditions of  
[^6]:  Quoted in M. Y. Gooneratne, *English Literature in Ceylon*, 815-1878, (1968)  
[^7]:  There are records of attempts to cut a Burmese fount at the Wesleyan type  
[^8]:  James Nicolson undertook the task of evaluating and recording the work  
[^9]:   Kularatne, ‘The Wesleyan Methodist’, p. 236  
[^10]:  Benjamin Clough was particularly interested in publishing work     that  
[^11]:  For a complete bibliography of Wesleyan MIssions work see XX.     Hardy writes  
[^12]:  Kularatne, ‘The Wesleyan Methodist’, p. 233  
[^13]:  Hardy, *Jubilee memorials*, p. 56,57  
[^14]:  Ibid.  
[^15]:  Kularathne, *History of printing, *p. 43  
[^16]:  Clough to Townby on 23 November 1830  
[^17]:  Alexander Johnstone, Chief Justice of Ceylon in a letter to     Wesleyan Mission  
[^18]:  Kularatne, ‘The Wesleyan Methodist’, p. 233  
[^19]:  Hardy, *Jubilee memorials*, p. 285  
[^20]:  Upon Governor’s request he overlooked the refurbishing of the     Government  
[^21]:  Harvard, *A Narrative,* p. 245  
[^22]: Harvard to Buckerly 10th April 1818 *Extracts from the Quarterly     Letters to the *  
[^23]:  Harvard, *A Narrative,* p. 295  
[^24]:  Hardy, *Jubilee memorials*, p. 283  
[^25]:  Clough October 1819 Extracts from Quarterly Letters  
[^26]:  Harvard, *A Narrative,* p. 395  
[^27]:  Ibid.  
[^28]:  Harvard, A Narrative, p. 400  
[^29]:  Ibid.  
[^30]:  Ibid. p. 271  
[^31]:  Harvard, *A Narrative,* p. 243  
[^32]: Multiple references about the qulity of Silverwork is seen in     litrature by Civil
