---
title:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Types and typography of Wesleyan Methodist Mission Press

In the first half of the 19th Century, the Wesleyan Mission Press shaped the style of Sinhala typography. The typographic style of the Wesleyans became the defacto standard for Sinhala typography for three reasons. The reputation of the Press for its quality and output must have encouraged the other printing presses of the time to follow their style and execution. Additionally there were no other presses which produced the Sinhala or Sinhala-Latin multiscript work in the volume of Wesleyan publications and the workers who trained at the Press left for jobs in other printing presses in the 1830s, and it is likely that they continued the style and practices.

The Wesleyan Mission Press was praised for the beauty and the quality of its execution. However, missionaries were critical of the quality of their work and constantly attempted to improve the quality.[^1] At the Paris Universal Exposition of 1878, Wesleyan Press was awarded an’Honorable Mention’ for their work.[^2] The Press presented a series of Sinhala and Sinhala-Latin multiscript books in ‘Printing and Books Class’ and a series of Sinhala and Tamil books used in Government Vernacular Schools in ‘Education of Children, Primary Instruction and Instruction of Adults Class’.[^3] Wesleyans succeeded and became pioneers as they had financial backing and government support. Through the years, they had missionaries who were trained in printing, technical proficiency and were acquainted with western typography-they had proficient missionaries who were dedicated to improving the standards of literary work.

## 6.1 The rise of a new typographic style

 Wesleyans completely disregarded the aspects of palm leaf manuscripts found in Sinhala typography by the Dutch Press.

The Sinhala punctuation mark kundaliya is not seen in the Wesleyan publications throughout the first years. The Serampore types do not seem to have produced a kundaliya in their fount, but with the type foundry in operation, Wesleyans could have used the kundaliya. The Wesleyans move introduced a new standard to the early 19th century Sinhala typography. The kundaliya became a punctuation reserved for Pali texts, Buddhist texts and Classical Sinhala texts. The grammar books and other non-religious books also omitted the kundaliya. By the early end of 19th century, the kundaliya was not in common Sinhala writing anymore.

The decorated initials found in the Dutch Press no longer appeared and, even in the works of other presses in the late 19th century, it is no longer seen. As mentioned in 3.2, William Tolfry’s new translation of the Bible introduced many new words and standards to Sinhala, the increased word breaks is one of them. The double horizontal lines introduced by the Dutch Press is not present In the Wesleyan Bibles, and the words are being broken in the middle in many instances, fitting the justified setting.

In the 1820s, the Press printed a range of Sinhala-Latin multiscript books which shaped the typographic standards of the century. The multiscript printing of the press had an effect on shaping typography of Sinhala. The Wesleyans kept using the Sinhala numeral system in mix with the Arabic numerals until the mid 19th century. In the early Bibles, the verses are numbered with Sinhala numerals and the pages are numbers and footnote numbers are presented with Arabic numerals. *Catalogue of the Indigenous and Exotic Plants Growing in Ceylon* (1824) is a one of the most sophisticated multiscript publication of this period. The Catalogue contains parallel text in Sinhala and English with transliteration of the Sinhala in Latin script. The titles, classification numbers and descriptors in Sinhala employs Sinhala numerals while the same in English and the transliteration use the Arabic numeral system. The lists, in which the values of the numbering become greater, are set with the Arabic numerals, even when the collation order and the primary entry is in Sinhala. However. A collection of extracts from the New Testament published in the same year *The Christian Institutes; or the Sincere word of God… *completely omit the Sinhala numerals. This publication uses the new fount cut in the 1820s, and it is likely that the Sinhala numerals were not cut for the new fount.

Wesleyan missionary James Nicholson (1834-1902), who arrived in Ceylon in 1861, is responsible for starting a new style in Sinhala typography and typeforms. He was a trained printer and sent to Ceylon to supervise the press.[^4] He was influential in moving the press into a new complex in 1870s. Nicholson was particularly interested in publishing economical pocket editions of the New Testament and a Bible in an ‘attractive form’. His * A Pocket Dictionary of The English And Sinhalese Languages*, is evidence of his interest in pocket versions of books. He was motivated in improving the quality of typography as he developed two new Sinhala founts with aim ‘prominent’, ‘readable’ and ‘attractive’ forms. Some of the key publications from the press in this period shows greater care for typography and quality of execution. *Sella Lihini Sandese: The Sella’s Message (1865) *is one of the finest work from the press, which employs all five Sinhala founts from the Wesleyan Press. (FIG XX) The improvements in the typography of the Wesleyan Press is evident in the comparison of the 1821 and 1892 editions of the Cloughs *A Sinhalese - English Dictionary.*

After the initial hurdle of sourcing a Sinhala fount was solved with arrival of Serampore type and subsequent amendment of the type, missionaries became aware of the style and aesthetics of the letters. There are two key periods which the type foundry was highly active and show significant development. The early 1820s, when Harvard, Callaway and Fox, the missionaries who acquainted with printing was in charge and the press was in good financial grounds. With the financial difficulties in late 1820s there was no new developments in type-making and, Benjamin Clough who was in charge of the press in the 1830s to 1840s did not have a background in printing. The next period, 1860s, the missionary activities were thriving and printing was a main tool in the activities. 1864 was the ‘Jubilee Year’ of the Wesleyan Press and Wesleyans were preparing for the celebrations from the 1860. James Nicholson, who ‘knew printing’ In both periods the missionaries who ‘knew printing’ arrived in Ceylon in 1861, and he is responsible for the some of the significant developments of the Press.

## 6.2 Setting up the type foundry and early types

William Martin Harvard setup a type foundry at the Wesleyan Mission Press in 1816 with the primary objective of amending Sinhala types from Serampore. Since the establishment of the foundry, all the Sinhala founts and types used at the Press were cut and cast in-house. Hardy writes that the missions foundry produced five Sinhala founts by 1864.[^5] Only the government press had a type foundry, but there is no evidence of Government press producing original founts at this time.[^6] With the advent of commercial printing in 1860s, and there were ‘several type casters’ in Colombo by 1870.[^7] And the most notable private type foundry Cooray and Company was established in 1892.[^8]

The smaller fount from Serampore arrived in Colombo broken and incomplete. After waiting for a new set of types for a few months, Harvard decided to set up a type foundry and cast the missing characters. It seems that the setting up of the foundry did not require significant resources or labour. Harvard hired a punchcutter and a mould maker and immediately started work. As mentioned in 5.3 the silverwork was a common and thriving industry, there were many skilled silversmiths in Colombo and and Harvard must have hired silversmiths for the punch cutting and casting type. No information surrounding the punch cutters’ identities was found during this study. As for the equipment, at the request of CABS, the government granted permission to use a set of moulds and matrices from the Government Press at the Wesleyan Type Foundry.[^9] It is likely that the matrices and moulds of the SP01 was also moved from the CABS press along with the printing machines in 1816. In October 1816, Harvard sent a request to London society for the following items from for the type foundry in October 1816. Within a few months, Harvard managed to complete the Serampore types with locally cut and cast types. He even sent a sample back to London as a curiosity to the missionaries museum.

In the early 1820s, many new additions and improvements were introduced through the type foundry. The typecase for Serampore Sinhala types was revised by the Wesleyan missionary John Callaway in 1819. Even after the additions by Harvard, two founts from the Serampore Press were defective. Certain characters were missing, or without enough types. Composition took longer as some of the smaller and defective. Callaway who was the Superintendent of the Press from 186 to 1819 attempted to solve the problem by introducing a new layout to the type case. He did a count of ‘average number of times each character occurs in a sheet of demy’; a frequency analysis of Sinhala text.[^10] Based on this he produced a new layout that was one third of the original size of the Sinhala type case. His work probably led to the introduction of the new Sinhala composition by the Wesleyan Mission Press.

By 1819 the founts from Serampore Press did not suffice the requirements of the press. The compound consonants characters used up to three pieces to compose. Due to their ‘smallness of the body’ the vowel symbols (pillam) were broken or bent and did not print in the text and looked inferior to the other languages.[^11] Missionaries were most likely comparing their Sinhala work to the other scriptures printed at the Serampore Mission Press, and attempting to emulate their style and quality. By 1821 the Sinhala types used at the Wesleyan Press had taken ‘very considerable improvements’ In 1818 the Press attempted casting a new fount on ‘small pica body’ with the vowel symbols attached to the consonant. This decision might have been based on the Callaway’s analysis and marks the beginning of the composition structure of Sinhala.

 This fount was in use by early 1820s and can be considered as a significant improvement over the early compositions. The stroke structure of the Serampore types are still present in the new fount with minor adjustments to fit the new composition. The the connected vowel symbols improves the visual integrity of the letterforms and the rhythm of the overall texture. However, Gogerly was not happy with the quality of the new types cast at the Foundry. In 1824 he writes that the He writes that the quality suffered from the imperfections of the type, which was created by the men at work and the low quality of type metal.

## 6.3 A new style and modulation

James Nicholson was the most influential missionary who worked in type making at the Wesleyan Press. Soon after arriving in Ceylon, he drew plans for two new Sinhala founts. The first fount (WP02), ‘A Sinhalese fount, of Great Primer’ which was in development by 1864, is a landmark in Sinhala typography as the traces of highly modulated structure of letterforms is first seen in this fount. It was a ‘bolder face’ than any of the previously produced typefaces for Sinhala and meant for use in handbills, lesson books and Scripture cards in a prominent and more readable form. The second ‘fount of Brevier’ (WP03) was smaller than any of the Sinhala founts made. This fount was specially cut for the pocket editions that Nicholson printed in the later years. The both founts were in use by 1865. [^12]

It is likely that the WP02 was cut first. Nicholson’s intention for an ‘attractive face’ with a ‘prominent’ form suggests he was aiming the look correspond directly to Great Primer size of Latin typography. The development of high contrast Latin Moderns was taking place in this period in Britain, and Nicholson who arrived in 1861, only had a few years of acquaintance with the Sinhala script. Although there is no indication of the particular contribution of Nicholson in making drawings or cutting the punches, he made the ‘arrangements’ and was ‘engaged’ of the process.

The stroke modulation of the WP02, does not directly resemble modulation of any of the previous Sinhala founts and the weight is introduced to make the type ‘bold’ while maintaining the stroke structure.

The smaller fount (WP03) that was cut after the WP02, and the same stroke modulation of the WP02 is introduced in this fount, with a lower contrast. But the texture of the impression is darker than any of the previous Sinhala founts. The addition of this extra weight based on the structure of WP02 is evident in ස(sa), ක(ka), න(na), ත(ta), ල(la), and. The addition of the weight might have been affected by the limits of punchcutting process in small sizes.

The founts that the Wesleyans produced in the early 19th century were solving specific technical problems in adapting the script to the method of composing with metal type. In the 1860s, the document production in Sinhala became a mainstream industry and the types produced in this period were focusing on addressing the specific typographic and stylistic needs of the time. It is natural that the references to the Western typography influenced the style, as the technical framework of printing with metal type were built around Latin script and typography. However, the Wesleyan Missionaries attitude towards the native belief systems and culture might have influenced their decisions to overlook and ignore some of the peculiarities of the traditional Sinhala letterforms. In the later years of 19th century the native type foundries continued the style and the high contrast model became popular.[^13]


[^1]: Kularatne, *History of* (2006)  
[^2]: Minutes of a meeting of the District Committee for the South Ceylon District  
[^3]: *Paris Universal Exhibition of 1878- *Catalogue of the British colonies*, (1878)  
[^4]: He had a keen interest in Printing activities of the press. He     compiled a  
[^5]: Hardy, *Jubilee* p. 45  
[^6]: Records reflect that Government press imported types, but without indication  
[^7]: An attempt to steal type from the Government Press is reported in 1870  
[^8]: Kularatne,* History of*, p. 278  
[^9]: Ibid. p. 276  
[^10]: John Callaway 29th June 1819 *Extracts from the Quarterly Letters* p. 84  
[^11]: Benjamin CLough 1820 *Extracts from the Quarterly Letters*  
[^12]: Nicholson to Missionary Committee, 01 March of 1864  
[^13]: R. Saraiva, (2012). An overview of Sinhala type design from the 18th century to
