---
title:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Conclusion

The 19th century was a time of change in Ceylon, and the Sinhala script transformed into a rich typographic script by its conclusion. The British Missionaries were leading printers until the advent of commercial printing operations and the Buddhist Revival Movement’s printing in the 1860s. Wesleyan Methodist Mission Press in Colombo was the first amongst the equals of time and had a significant impact on the development of the document production in Sinhala. Missions’ work in printing and publishing set standards in language and grammar, Sinhala-Latin multiscript typography and modulation of Sinhala letterforms. Their contribution to the development of typography was influenced by the hostile and repressive attitude of colonists towards the natives and their culture.

The increasing demand for new kinds of Sinhala written content and complex documents in the early 19th century introduced many reforms to the Sinhala language. The influence of palm-leaf manuscript styles seen in the early 18th-century Sinhala printed material diminished in the 19th century, and new standards were introduced. The Western typographic examples as well as other Indic script publications from Serampore Mission Press influenced the work of the Weslyan Press. The shapes of the letterforms and stroke modulation had great variety and styles in the 19th century, but the modern Western-style influenced high contrast modulation introduced in the 1860s became the standard. The 1860s onwards there was a great increase in printing activities in Ceylon and all outlets adopted the styles and solutions developed by the Wesleyan Press. This was the dawn of commercial printing in Ceylon and presses were attempting to emulate Wesleyan standards.

It is conclusive that, the Western typographic standards and trends of the 19th century influenced the shape of Sinhala letterforms and the style of typography. Technical framework of the metal composition developed for Latin typography posed restriction when adapting the Sinhala script for printing. However, this influence is not an isolated incident of cultural invasion, but part of a wider series of social and economic adjustments that took place under British colonial rule and the evangelical missionary movement. Exploring the circumstances in which these historical models developed, and motives and agendas influenced the decisions made in this time, aids in developing a better evaluation criteria of typeforms engaging in further research in the visual development of Sinhala type and typography. 