---
title:
collection: chapters
layout: default.html
---

# Bibliography

- Catalogue Of The British Colonies (1878) Offices of the Royal Commission.
Harris, Elizabeth J. (2010) Manipulating Meaning: Daniel Gogerly’s Nineteenth Century Translations of the Theravada Texts. Buddhist Studies Review, 27 (2). p. 177. ISSN 02652897.
- The history of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society.
- Corea, J.C.A. (1969) One Hundred Years of Education in Ceylon. Mod. Asian Stud. \[Online\] 3 (2), 151. Available from:doi:10.1017/s0026749x00002250.
- De Silva, K.M. (1965) LCCN: 67007529. Social policy and missionary organizations in Ceylon, 1840-1855. Imperial studies. Published for the Royal Commonwealth Society by Longmans.
- De Silva, W.A. (1938) Catalogue of Palm Leaf Manuscripts in the Library of the Colombo Museum. \[publisher not identified\].
- Disanayaka, J. (n.d.) Encyclopaedia of Sinhala language and culture. \[Kalubowila\]: (2012th edition) . Colombo, Sumitha Publishers.
- Godakumbura, C.E. (1955) Sinhalese literature. Colombo Apothecaries’ Co.
- Hardy, R.S. (n.d.) Ceylon and its Methodism.
- Hardy, R.S. (1864) Jubilee memorials of the Wesleyan Mission, South Ceylon. Printed at the Wesleyan Mission Press.
- Harris, E.J. (2006) Theravada Buddhism and the British encounter. Routledge.
- Jurriaanse, M.W. (1943) Gabriel schade and his invention of the Sinhalese type. Journal of the Dutch Burgher Union. XXXII (4), 136,137.
- Kularatne, E.D.T. (1997) The Wesleyan Methodist Mission in the Printing and Publishing Industry in the 19th Century Ceylon. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Sri Lanka. 42213–242.
- Kularatne, T. (2006a). History of Printing and Publishing in Ceylon, 1736-1912. Colombo, Tilak Kularatne.
- Malalgoda, K. (1976) Buddhism in Sinhalese society, 1750-1900. University of California Press.
- Marshman, J. (1815) A memoir of the Serampore translations for 1813. J.G. Fuller.
- Mendis, G.C. (1952) LCCN: 2006345585. Ceylon Under the British. Asian Educational Services.
- Murdoch, J., JohnNicholson (1868) Classified catalogue of printed tracts and books in Singhalese. Printed by C. Foster.
- Ross, F.G.E. (1999) The printed Bengali character and its evolution. Curzon.
- Schrikker, A. (2006) Dutch and British colonial intervention in Sri Lanka c. 1780-1815: expansion and reform. s.n.\].
- Shedlock, M.L. (1910) A collection of eastern stories and legends. London, George Routledge & sons.
- Swearer, D.K. (1970) Lay Buddhism and the Buddhist Revival in Ceylon. J Am Acad Relig. \[Online\] XXXVIII (3), 255–275. Available from: doi:10.1093/jaarel/xxxviii.3.255.
- Tennent, J.E. (1850) Christianity in Ceylon. John Murray.
- Whelan, T.D. (2009) Baptist autographs in the John Rylands University Library of Manchester, 1741-1845. Mercer University Press.
- Wijayawardhana, H. (2009) Numerations in the Sinhala Language. Colombo, Strategic Communications Unit, ICTA.
